---
title: "IPIP-0445: Option to Skip Raw Blocks in Gateway Responses"
date: 2023-10-09
ipip: open
editors:
  - name: Hugo Valtier
    github: Jorropo
    url: https://jorropo.net/
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/444
order: 445
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Introduce `skip-raw-blocks` flag for the :cite[trustless-gateway].

## Motivation

Allow clients to read a stream which only contain proofs in a bottom heavy
graph using `raw` codec for it's leaves.

Usefull for UnixFS for features like webseeds
([ipfs/specs#444](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/444)), where metadata
about a DAG is fetched from a trustless gateway, but the actual raw data can be
fetched from any source that supports either trustless gateway specification,
or plain HTTP Range Requests, allowing for trustless and verifiable data
retrieval from plain HTTP (non-IPFS) data sources.

## Detailed design

The `skip-raw-blocks` URL query parameter on :cite[trustless-gateway]
allows clients to download an entity except blocks with the multicodec
`raw` (`0x55`).

- When set to `y`, the parameter instructs the gateway not to transmit
  blocks referenced with a CID with the `raw` multicodec.
- If set to `n`, or left unspecified, there is no special handling of `raw`
  multicodec blocks (the existing default behavior remains the same).

Importantly, unless explicitly specified as `y`, the default operational
mode of the gateway MUST assume the value of `skip-raw-blocks` to be `n`.

## Design rationale

### User Benefit

Implementing the `skip-raw-blocks` parameter offers several benefits to users:

1. **Verification Flexibility:** Clients can verify out-of-band (OOB) received
   files in their deserialized form without necessitating the transmission of
   raw blocks from the gateway.

2. **Incremental Download:** Clients can incrementally download files in
   deserialized forms from non-IPFS servers. Allowing applications to share
   distribution for IPFS and non-IPFS clients.

3. **Efficient Block Discovery:** With the `skip-raw-blocks` option enabled,
   clients can quickly discover numerous candidate blocks without being
   bottlenecked by the gateway's transmission of raw blocks.

4. **Non-IPFS HTTP Mirrors Become Useful:** Legacy data that is already exposed
   over HTTP in deserialized form can now act as sources for specific block
   byte ranges, without having to support any IPFS specific APIs. Plain HTTP
   Range Requests can be used for fetching remaining raw block data, and the
   metadata read via `skip-raw-blocks=y` is enough for a client to verify the
   remaining raw block byte ranges fetched from non-IPFS system match expected
   CIDs.

### Compatibility

Setting the default value of the `skip-raw-blocks` parameter to `n` ensures
backward compatibility with existing clients and systems that are unaware
of this new flag.

### Alternatives

An alternative approach would be to request blocks individually.
However, it adds extra round trips and more per HTTP request overhead
and thus is undesirable.

#### Why not `dag-scope=skip-raw-blocks` ?

The existing `dag-scope` parameter determines the overall range of blocks to retrieve,
while `skip-raw-blocks` selectively filters specific blocks across all scopes and ranges.
Combining them under one parameter would restrict their combined utility.

For example:
- A client is streaming a video from a webseed and the user seeks through the
  video, then the client would send `dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=42:1337`
  with `skip-raw-blocks=y` to download the proofs for the required section of the
  video, and then fetches remaining raw data byte ranges from a faster CDN.
- A client is verifying an OOB transferred directory in deserialized form,
  then `dag-scope=all` with `skip-raw-blocks=y` makes sense.

#### Why not CAR content type parameter ?

CAR content type's
([application/vnd.ipld.car](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.car))
optional parameters like `order` and `dups` impact the way data is represented
when returned as a CAR stream, but does modify the scope of the data itself.
Does not add nor subtract data from the response.

The scope of the data is controlled by URL content path and optional
`dag-scope`, `entity-bytes` URL parameters.  This is where `skip-raw-blocks`
belongs.

This is not just a matter of aesthetics: the URL path and query parameters
allow for caching of different subsets of a DAG in a way that is interoperable
with existing HTTP tools and clients, minimizes risk of caching incomplete DAG
response due to HTTP cache misconfiguration. Thanks to `skip-raw-blocks` being
in the URL query, we ensure CAR responses without `raw` blocks will be cached
under different key than full responses (just like already existing `dag-scope`
and `entity-bytes`).

#### Why not generic `skip-leaves` that skips all leaves, not just `raw` blocks?

Prevention of amplification attacks and efficient server operation.

By utilizing the `raw` (`0x55`) codec servers can trivially determine whether
to fetch or skip a block without having to fetch it to learn any new
information.

If we framed this feature around skipping all leaf nodes, that would require
server to fetch the leaves to learn if they have any child nodes. This would
force server to fetch data that is never returned to the client.

Although `skip-raw-blocks` is more limited and not able to handle UnixFS files
chunked without `--raw-leaves` option, it allows both the client and server to
trivially verify a block must not be fetched. Preventing issues of
Amplification where a server could need to fetch multiple orders more data than
the client when executing the request.

## Security

This IPIP does not impact security model of trustless gateway.

## Test fixtures

:::issue

TODO: update below section with CIDs or CARs from conformance tests

Scenarios we should check:
- [ ] reuse existing UnixFS DAG that has raw-leaves, request it with
  `skip-raw-blocks=n`, confirm the response includes expected raw leaves' CIDs
- [ ] create a new CAR fixture that only have non-raw blocks. Request it with
  `skip-raw-blocks=y`, confirm the response includes expected CIDs and does not
  include raw blocks referenced by parents.
  - important part is creating CAR fixture by hand, and ensure the raw blocks are
    NEVER announced anywhere (generate fixture with random data, add to ipfs
    with raw-leaves option, then export DAG without `raw` blocks (use go-car's
    [`filter`](https://github.com/ipld/go-car/tree/master/cmd/car#readme) or
    similar)
    - Why? This goes extra mile, but ensures every conformant gateway
      implementation is not doing useless work of fetching raw blocks which are
      not required for fulfilling `skip-raw-blocks=y` requests). We did
      similar thing for `entity-bytes` and it was the only way we could show
      bugs in Saturn project's cache implementation at the time.

:::

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
