---
title: "IPIP-0462: Ipfs-Path-Affinity on Gateways"
date: 2024-02-16
ipip: proposal
editors:
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
    affiliation:
        name: IP Shipyard
        url: https://ipshipyard.com
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/issues/10251
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/issues/8676
order: 462
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

This IPIP adds gateway support for optional `Ipfs-Path-Affinity` HTTP request header.

## Motivation

Endpoints that implement :cite[trustless-gateway] may receive requests for a
single block, or a CAR request sub-DAG of a biger tree.

Not every CID is announced today, some providers limit announcements to
top-level root CIDs due to time and cost.
The introduction of an optional `Ipfs-Path-Affinity` header can increase the success rate of the gateway retrieving the request block, especially if the requested block is not announced. 
What does this mean for the ecosystem? It should adapt. Over time, both clients and
servers should leverage the concept of "affinity".

## Detailed design

Introduce `Ipfs-Path-Affinity` HTTP request header to allow HTTP client to
inform gateway about the context of block/CAR request.

Client asking gateway for a block SHOULD provide a hint about the DAG the block
belongs to, if such information is available.

A gateway unable to find providers for internal block should be
able to leverage affinity information sent by client and use CIDs of parent
path segments as additional content routing lookup hints.

## Design rationale

### User benefit

When supported by both client and server:

- Light clients are able to use trustless HTTP gateway endpoints more
  efficiently, resume downloads faster.
- Gateway operators are able to leverage the hint and save resources related to
  provider lookup.
- Content providers are able to implement smarter announcement mechanisms,
  without worrying that some internal blocks are not announced (intentionally or unintentionally).

### Compatibility

This is an optional HTTP header which makes it backward-compatible with
existing ecosystem of HTTP clients and IPFS Gateways.

### Security

The client is in control when the affinity information is sent in the header,
and an implementation SHOULD allow an end user to disable it in context where parent
content path information is considered sensitive information.

### Alternatives

N/A

## Test fixtures

N/A

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
