---
title: "IPIP-0412: Signaling Block Order in CARs on HTTP Gateways"
date: 2023-05-15
ipip: ratified
editors:
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
  - name: Jorropo
    github: Jorropo
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/348
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/330
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/402
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/412
order: 412
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Adds support for additional, optional content type options that allow the
client and server to signal or negotiate a specific block order in the returned
CAR.

## Motivation

We want to make it easier to build light-clients for IPFS. We want them to have
low memory footprints on arbitrary sized files. The main pain point preventing
this is the fact that CAR ordering isn't specified.

This requires keeping some kind of reference either on disk, or in memory to
previously seen blocks for two reasons.

1. Blocks can arrive out of order, meaning when a block is consumed (data is
   read and returned to the consumer) and when it's received might not match.

1. Blocks can be reused multiple times, this is handy for cases when you plan
   to cache on disk but not at all when you want to process a stream with use &
   forget policy.

What we really want is for the gateway to help us a bit, and give us blocks in
a useful order.

The existing Trustless Gateway specification does not provide a mechanism for
negotiating the order of blocks in CAR responses.

This IPIP aims to improve the status quo.

## Detailed design

CAR content type
([`application/vnd.ipld.car`](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ipld.car))
already supports `version` parameter, which allows gateway to indicate which
CAR flavor is returned with the response.

The proposed solution introduces two new parameters for the content type headers
in HTTP requests and responses: `order` and `dups`.

The `order` parameter allows the client to indicate its preference for a
specific block order in the CAR response, and the `dups` parameter specifies
whether duplicate blocks are allowed in the response.

A Client SHOULD send `Accept` HTTP header to leverage content type negotiation
based on section 12.5.1 of :cite[rfc9110] to get the preferred response type.

More details in Section 5. (CAR Responses) of :cite[trustless-gateway].

## Design rationale

The proposed specification change aims to address the limitations of the
existing Trustless Gateway specification by introducing a mechanism for
negotiating the block order in CAR responses.

By allowing clients to indicate their preferred block order, Trustless Gateways
can cache CAR responses for popular content, resulting in improved performance
and reduced network load. Clients benefit from more efficient data handling by
deserializing blocks as they arrive,

We reuse exiting HTTP content type negotiation, and the CAR content type, which
already had the optional `version` parameter.

### User benefit

The proposed specification change brings several benefits to end users:

1. Improved Performance: Gateways can decide on their implicit default ordering
   and cache CAR responses for popular content. In turn, clients can benefit
   from strong `Etag` in ordered (deterministic) responses. This reduces the
   response time for subsequent requests, resulting in faster content retrieval
   for users.

2. Reduced Memory Usage: Clients no longer need to buffer the entire CAR
   response in memory until the deserialization of the requested entity is
   finished. With the ability to deserialize blocks as they arrive, users can
   conserve memory resources, especially when dealing with large CAR responses.

3. Efficient Data Handling: By discarding blocks as soon as the CID is
   validated and data is deserialized, clients can efficiently process the data
   in real-time. This is particularly useful for light clients, IoT devices,
   mobile web browsers, and other streaming applications where immediate access
   to the data is required.

4. Customizable Ordering: Clients can indicate their preferred block order in the
   `Accept` header, allowing them to prioritize specific ordering strategies that
   align with their use cases. This flexibility enhances the user experience
   and empowers users to optimize content retrieval according to their needs.

### Compatibility

The proposed specification change is backward compatible with existing client
and server implementations.

Trustless Gateways that do not support the negotiation of block order in CAR
responses will continue to function as before, providing their existing default
behavior, and the clients will be able to detect it by inspecting the
`Content-Type` header present in HTTP response.

Clients that do not send the `Accept` header or do not recognize the `order`
and `dups` parameters in the `Content-Type` header will receive and process CAR
responses as they did before: buffering/caching all blocks until done with the
final deserialization.

Existing implementations can choose to adopt the new specification and
implement support for the negotiation of block order incrementally. This allows
for a smooth transition and ensures compatibility with both new and old
clients.

### Security

The proposed specification change does not introduce any negative security
implications beyond those already present in the existing Trustless Gateway
specification. It focuses on enhancing performance and data handling without
affecting the underlying security model of IPFS.

Light clients with support for `order` and  `dups` CAR content type parameters
will be able to detect malicious response faster, reducing risks of
memory-based DoS attacks from malicious gateways.

### Alternatives

Several alternative approaches were considered before arriving at the proposed solution:

1. Implicit Server-Side Configuration: Instead of negotiating the block order,
   in the CAR response, the Trustless Gateway could have a server-side
   configuration that specifies the default order. However, this approach would
   limit the flexibility for clients, requiring them to have prior knowledge
   about order supported by each gateway.

2. Fixed Block Order: Another option was to enforce a fixed block order in the
   CAR responses. However, this approach would not cater to the varying needs
   and preferences of different clients and use cases, and is not backward
   compatible with the existing Trustless Gateways which return CAR responses
   with Weak `Etag` and unspecified block order.

3. Separate `X-` HTTP Header: Introduction of a separate HTTP reader was
   rejected because we try to use HTTP semantics where possible, and gateways
   already use HTTP content type negotiation for CAR `version` and reusing it
   saves a few bytes in each round-trip. Also, :cite[rfc6648] advises against
   use of `X-` and similar constructs in new protocols.

4. The decision to not implement a single preset pack with predefined behavior,
   instead of separate parameters for order and duplicates (dups), was driven
   by considerations of ambiguity and potential future problems when adding
   more determinism to responses. For instance, if we were to include a new
   behavior like `foo=y|n` alongside an existing preset like `pack=orderdfs+dupsy`,
   it would either necessitate the addition of a separate parameter or impose
   the adoption of a new version of every preset (e.g., `orderdfs-dupsy+fooy` and
   `orderdfs+dupsy+foon`). Maintaining and deploying such changes across a
   decentralized ecosystem, where gateways may operate on different software,
   becomes more complex. In contrast, utilizing separate parameters for each
   behavior enables easier maintenance and deployment in a decentralized
   ecosystem with varying gateway software.

The proposed solution of negotiating the block order through headers is
future-proof, allows for flexibility, interoperability, and customization while
maintaining compatibility with existing implementations.

## Test fixtures

Implementation compliance can be determined by testing the negotiation process
between clients and Trustless Gateways using various combinations of `order` and
`dups` parameters.

Relevant tests were added to
[gateway-conformance](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance) test suite
in [#87](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/pull/87), and include the below fixture.

- `bafybeihchr7vmgjaasntayyatmp5sv6xza57iy2h4xj7g46bpjij6yhrmy`
  ([CAR](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.3.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/dir-with-duplicate-files.car))
  - An UnixFS directory with two files that are the same (same CID).
  - If `dups=n`, then there should be no duplicate blocks in the returned CAR.
  - If `dups=y`, then the blocks of the file are sent twice.
  - The same fixture can be used for testing `order=dfs` and checking if blocks that belong to files arrive in the DFS order.
    - It is encouraged to also test DFS order with HAMT fixture such as `bafybeidbclfqleg2uojchspzd4bob56dqetqjsj27gy2cq3klkkgxtpn4i`
      ([CAR](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.3.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car))

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
