---
title: "IPIP-0342: Content Router Ambient Discovery"
date: 2022-11-11
ipip: proposal
editors:
  - name: Will Scott
    github: willscott
    affiliation:
      name: Protocol Labs
      url: https://protocol.ai/
  - name: Masih Derkani
    github: masih
    affiliation:
      name: Protocol Labs
      url: https://protocol.ai/
relatedIssues:
  - https://hackmd.io/bh4-SCWfTBG2vfClG0NUFg
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/issues/9150
  - https://github.com/filecoin-project/storetheindex/issues/823
order: 342
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Design discovery and ranking of public content routers on the network.

## Motivation

The Interplanetary stack has slowly opened itself to support extensibility of
the content routing subsystem. This extensibility is used today by network
indexers, like https://cid.contact/, to bridge content from large providers
that cannot practically provide all content to the IPFS DHT. A missing piece
of this story is that there is not a process by which IPFS nodes can discover
these alternative content routing systems automatically. This IPIP proposes
a mechanism by which IPFS nodes can discover and make use of content routing
systems.

The mechanism proposed by this IPIP, where nodes gossip preferred routers
to their connected peers, can also have broader applications. The same
mechanism could be used for external IPNS, peer routers, relays, or DNS
resolvers. We point out the label allowing re-use of this mechanism for
other systems in the [protocol design](#1-content-routing-as-a-libp2p-protocol),
but otherwise leave the concrete design for other systems to subsequent
IPIPs.

There is currently not a process by which IPFS nodes can use alternative
content routing systems automatically. This has led to a reliance on
centralized systems, like the hydra boosters, to fill the gap and offer
content only available in network indexers to current IPFS nodes. This strategy
is also insufficient long term because:
1. It limits speed to the use of a globally distributed kademlia DHT
2. It is insufficient for providing content in applications where content grows
    super-linearly to peers, such that the burden on a traditional DHT would
    become unsustainable.

## Detailed design

This spec is designed for the ability of IPFS nodes to automatically discover
and make use of 'content routers'. Content routers are services which are able
to fulfill IPFS's [ContentRouting](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/blob/master/core/routing/routing.go#L26)
API. These routers currently are considered to directly support queries using
the protocols specified by
[IPIP-337](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pulls/337)
and/or
[IPIP-327](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/327).

In addition, this protocol expects that content routers that may be considered
for auto-configuration/discovery by IPFS nodes will have knowledge of the
entire CID space - in other words a delegation to such a router may be
considered 'exhaustive'.

### 0. content-router discovery state tracking

Nodes will conceptually track a registry about known content routers.
This registry will be able to understand for a given content router two
properties:
* reliability - how many good vs bad responses has this router responded
with. This statistic should be windowed, such that the client can calculate
it in terms of the last week or month. This will in practice be stored as
daily buckets of successful and unsuccessful queries against a router, where
success indicates that the router was queried, and the data was subsequently
retrieved from a node returned as a provider by that router.
* performance - how quickly does this router respond.

This protocol expects nodes to be able to keep reliability (a metric
capturing both availability and correctness) separate from performance
for the purpose of propagating content routing information.

In addition, nodes may wish to track the most recent time they have learned
content routing information from the other peers they are and have been
connected with.

Conceptually, propagation of content routers will look like nodes gossiping
their knowledge of router existence to each other. Initially, we expect that
the current topology will look a bit more like a feedback loop over a
bipartite graph - where one side of the graph is the set of general purpose
IPFS nodes, and the other side are the bootstrap and core-infrastructural
nodes with high connectivity in the network.

### 1. content-routing as a libp2p protocol

IPFS nodes will advertise and coordinate discover of content routers using a
new libp2p protocol advertised as "/ipfs/router-discovery/1.0.0".

The protocol will follow a request-response model.
A node will open a stream on the protocol when it wants to discover new
content routers it does not already know.
The node will request routers from the peer that it does not already know.
To express what it does know, it will query with a bloom filter. The
statistical data structure provides a minimal amount of deniability around
the routers that the client already knows.

* The size of the bloom filter is chosen by the client. It is sized such
that it has a greater than 99% certainly that it will receive a useful
response. The maximum size of a query may be capped by the server, but can be
effectively considered to be under 10kb.
* The client will hash it's known content routers into the bloom filter
to set bits in the filter at the locations to which these known routers
hash.
* The server will have a parameter for a number of servers it wants to return
to content discovery queries. By default this will be 10. (This default is
picked as the result of modeling router propagation). It will iterate through
it's list of known content routers, hashing them against the bloom filter and
selecting the top routers that are not already known to the client. It will
return this list, along with it's reliability score for each.

#### protocol messages

Protocol messages are encoded using *cbor*. The following protocol examples demonstrate
the schemas of requests and responses if they were to be encoded with JSON.

A query on the "/ipfs/router-discovery/1.0.0" protocol will look like:

```json
{
  "router": "string",
  "filter": "bytes of the bloom filter"
}
```

A concrete example would be:

```json
{
  "router": "content-routing",
  "filter": {"/": {"Bytes": "xhCakxnfIHbzeOjqlbZjawUKf7uvCXAkp0L5z9jF3actECFyCzriAuS1xiyhBCailtsYEwoy/hanhiIHqTZgnA=="}}
}
```

A response is a list of entries, which looks like:

```json
[
  {
    "peer": "multiaddr.MultiAddr",
    "score": float
  }
]
```

A concrete example would be:

```json
[
  {
    "peer": "/dns4/cid.contact/tcp/443/https",
    "score": 0.95
  },
  {
    "peer": "/dns4/dev.cid.contact/tcp/443/https",
    "score": 0.90
  },
]
```

### 2. probing of the discovery protocol

A node will probe it's connected peers for content routing updates in two
situations:

1. When it needs to perform a content routing query, and has not
successfully performed a sync in over a day.
2. When it's AutoNAT status indicates it is eligible to be a DHT server, and
it has not successfully performed a sync in over a day.

These parameters are also set through modeling.

To perform a probe, the node will consider the set of peers it is currently
connected to. It will order peers. The specific ordering is left to the
node, but it should strive for diversity - an example ordering would be to
rank peers by how recently a content routing discovery query has been make
to that peer, with tie breaking preference for LAN nodes and for nodes
with explicit peering agreements.

Other factors that may be considered include:
* Reputation of the peer, including how long it has been connected and if it
  has served useful content in the past.
* Latency / ping time of the peer.

### 3. selection of routers

Nodes are free to make content routing queries across content routing
systems they are aware of as they wish. An example strategy balancing
user experience and discovery is described.

The node maintains two thresholds:
* good (reliability > 99%, performance < 100ms)
* uncertain (queries < 5)

Content routers meeting the good reliability threshold are ordered by
performance. the top one is queried, as is an 'uncertain' router if
one exists.

These threshold values are maintained for a year for the purposes
of local selection.
They are maintained for a month for the purpose of admitting
knowledge of routers to others - so a client will no longer set bits for
routers it is aware of but which do not meet it's threshold for 'good'
after a month. If peers then subsequently respond with these nodes
on discovery probes, the local node may use that to consider the
node as again 'uncertain' and attempt additional probes against it less than
a year later.

Nodes which participate as DHT servers should also consider if they
are being used only in an infrastructural capacity. If they are
receiving content routing requests from other peers, but there have been
no direct requests from the node itself that can be used to move
known content routers past the 'uncertain' threshold, the node may
choose to issue content routing queries for a fraction of the DHT
lookup queries it receives as a way to maintain a more accurate
table of content  routers.

## Test fixtures

A random CID should be generated that is only available through a
non-DHT content routing system. This is a piece of content can then be
queried to validate the presence of alternative content routing systems.

An example service that can be used as part of testing is at
https://github.com/willscott/ipni-minimal-publisher

## Design rationale

As expressed in the motivation section, we need to design a system through
which nodes can discover content routers without a centralized point of
failure, and can use these routers to improve user performance for content
routing to levels faster than the current DHT.

This design is self-contained - it does not require standing up additional
infrastructure or making additional connections for discovery but rather
gossips routers over existing peer connections.

The design limits the ability of an adversary to impact user experience:
1. it does not propose at this stage to replace DHT queries, but only to
supplement them with content routing queries, which minimized user
noticeable impact.
2. nodes will only propagate content routers they believe to work,
limiting the spread of spam / unavailable content routers to the directly
connected peers of an adversary.

With the exception of LAN tables, the other connections made by IPFS
nodes do not have geographic locality. As a result, performance is
separated in the tracking of content routers because it will not be
effective as a ranking factor in the non-geographically-aware
gossip system described here. As an optimization, nodes may choose to
prioritize 'fast' content routers when responding to queries from peers
where sharded latency observations may be relevant. For example:
* Peers on the local LAN
* Peers in the local /16 IPv4 subnet
* Peers with observed latency less than 25ms

### User benefit

- Users will benefit from faster discovery of content providers.
- Users will also benefit from access to more CIDs than they currently do through
queries limited to the IPFS DHT
- Router discovery and reputation mechanism improves resilience.
- IPFS user agents will not be tied to static set of hard-coded HTTP endpoints
  that may stop working at any time.
- Users will benefit from replacing misbehaving (censorship, DoS, hardware
  failure) routers with useful ones without having to upgrade their software.

### Compatibility

Nodes which do not implment this IPIP will be limited to the sub-set of
content available in the DHT. this will potentially degrade over time as more
large providers limit their publishing per the [IPNI](https://github.com/ipni)
ingestion protocol.

Nodes may limit their complexity through a hard-coded list of known content
routers, essentially limiting their implementation to design section 3 of this
IPIP. This comes at a price: (1) hard-coded routers become easy targets
for denial of service attacks, decreasing the resiliency of the entire setup;
(2) nodes risk being out of date and to offer sub-optimal performance through their
failure to discover additional near-by content routing instances.

### Security

TODO: this section provides a rough sketch of arguments, but has not been fully
developed into prose at this time. At present, it is most useful for
comments and suggestions of other security considerations that should be
included as this draft develops.

#### 1. Malicious Content Routers

##### a. Providing Bad Content Routing Records

* records under double hashing are signed, so can't provide a record for a real peer
* if you provide non-working records, you are down-ranked

##### b. Availability Attacks / failing to provide records

* if list of records insufficient, client will get more from other providers in subsequent queries, leading to down-ranking

#### 2. Exposure of IPFS Clients (enumeration of network participants)

* a new provider is only visible to directly connected peers. they only forward it to peers asking them if it meets their bar
for reliability.  This means propagation through the network is only possible for routers that behave correctly.
* because clients only propagate their 'top' routers, latency is also relevant, and with sufficient number of routers, they would only
propagate in their local geographic area before becoming uncompetitive on latency.

### Alternatives

#### Ambient discovery in the style of circuit relays

Circuit relays are discovered ambiently by nodes during protocol enumeration.
When connecting with another libp2p node, IPFS nodes will probe
supported protocols. If they notice circuit relay support at this time, they
make use of such aggregated knowledge when making connections needing the
support of relays.

This is not considered sufficient for content routing, because most content
routers will not act as general peers within the IPFS mesh, so they would
not be directly discovered. Instead, the gossip discovery protocol is
ambiently discovered in much the same way as circuit relays.

#### Advertisement in the DHT

This suffers from one of two problems depending on tuning: Either it results in
a global list that all clients see new providers, or it takes an inordinant
amount of querying before a client happens to run into a provider, leading to
degraded experiences for most clients. The single global list that a provider
can automatically add itself to leads to issues for how to mitigate an
enumeration of all network participants by a malicious content router.

Pros:
* Network is already there, no need to create a new protocol to "provide" new providers instead of CIDs.
* You could potentially associate a provider with a specific root CID content.

Cons:
* Nodes cannot drop use of the DHT / other content routing options always are 'second tier'.

#### Static list of known routers distributed with IPFS clients

This has worked for the current IPFS bootstrap node, but leads to the need for
policies around how to decide which content routers will be included in such a
list, and fails to evolve efficiently as new content routers are added to the
system.

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
