---
title: "IPIP-0402: Partial CAR Support on Trustless Gateways"
date: 2023-04-17
ipip: ratified
editors:
  - name: Hannah Howard
    github: hannahhoward
  - name: Adin Schmahmann
    github: aschmahmann
  - name: Rod Vagg
    github: rvagg
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/348
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/issues/8769
order: 402
tags: ['ipips']
xref:
  - trustless-gateway
---

## Summary

Add path and partial CAR response support to the :cite[trustless-gateway].

## Motivation

:cite[trustless-gateway] solves the verifiability problem in HTTP contexts,
and allows for inexpensive retrieval and caching in a way that is not tied to
a specific service, library or IPFS implementation.

This IPIP improves the performance related to trustless HTTP gateways by adding
additional capabilities to requests for CAR files.

The goal is to enable a client capable of translating/decoding CAR files to
make a single request to a trustless gateway that in most case allows them to
render the same output generated via a request to a trusted gateway (or, if not
in a single request, as few requests as possible).

Save round-trips, allow more efficient resume and parallel downloads.

## Detailed design

The solution is to allow the :cite[trustless-gateway] to support partial
responses by:

- allowing for requesting sub-paths within a DAG, and getting blocks necessary
  for traversing all path segments for end-to-end verification

- opt-in `dag-scope` parameter that allows for narrowing down returned blocks
  to a `block`, `entity` (a logical IPLD entity, such as a file, directory,
  CBOR document), or `all` (default)

- opt-in `entity-bytes` parameter that allows for returning only a subset of blocks
  within a logical IPLD entity

Details are in :cite[trustless-gateway].

## Design rationale

The approach here is pragmatic: we add a minimum set of predefined CAR export
scopes based on real world needs, as a product of the rough consensus across
key stakeholders: gateway operators, Project Saturn, Project Rhea (`ipfs.io`
and `dweb.link`), light clients such as Capyloon and IPFS in Chromium, and
gateway implementation in `boxo/gateway` library (Go).

Terse rationale for each feature:

- Including blocks necessary for traversing parents when a  sub-path is present
  makes a better default, as it produces verifiable archive that does not
  require any follow-up requests. The response is always enough to verify
  end-to-end and reject any unexpected / invalid blocks.

- The ability to narrow down CAR response based on logical scope or specific byte
  range within an entity comes directly from the types of requests existing
  path gateways need to handle.
  - `dag-scope=block` allows for resolving content paths to the final CID, and
    learn its type (unixfs file/directory, or a custom codec)
  - `dag-scope=entity` covers the majority of website hosting needs (returning a
    file, enumerating directory contents, or any other IPLD entity)
  - `dag-scope=all` returns all blocks in a DAG: was the existing behavior and
    remains the implicit default
  - `entity-bytes=from:to` enables efficient, verifiable analog to HTTP Range Requests
    (resuming downloads or seeking within bigger files, such as videos)
    - `from` and `to` match the behavior of HTTP Range Requests.

### User benefit

- Trustless HTTP Clients will be able to fetch a CAR with a file, byte range,
  or a directory enumeration using a way lower number of HTTP requests, which
  will translate to improved resource utilization, longer battery time on
  mobile, and lower latency due to lower number of round trips.

- CAR files downloaded from HTTP Gateways will always be end-to-end verifiable.
  In the past, user had to manually ensure they have blocks for all path
  segments. With this IPIP, the CAR will always include parent blocks when a
  file located on a sub-path is requested.

- Creating a standard way of fetching partial CAR over HTTP enables a diverse set of clients and gateway services to interoperate, and reuse libraries:
  - [Service Worker Gateway based on Helia](https://github.com/ipfs-shipyard/helia-service-worker-gateway)
  - [IPFS in Chromium](https://github.com/ipfs/ipfs-blog/pull/560/files)
  - [boxo/gateway](https://github.com/ipfs/boxo/tree/main/gateway) provides HTTP Gateway implementation for
    - [Kubo](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo)
    - [HTTP retrieval in Boost](https://boost.filecoin.io/http-retrieval)
    - [bifrost-gateway](https://github.com/ipfs/bifrost-gateway)

- Trustless Gateway is solidified as the ecosystem wide standard.

  - IPIP tests added to
    [gateway-conformance](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance) test
    suite and fixtures listed at the end of this IPIP make it easier to
    implement or operate a conformant gateway, and reduce maintenance costs.

  - End users are empowered with primitives and tools that reduce retrieval
    cost, encourage self-hosting, or make validation of conformance claims of
    free or commercial gateways possible.

### Compatibility

#### CAR responses with blocks for parent path segments

In order to serve CAR requests for content paths other than just a CID root in
a trustless manner, we are requiring the gateway to return intermediate blocks
from the CID root to the path terminus as part of the returned CAR file.

HTTP Gateway implementations are currently only returning blocks starting at
the end of the content path, which means an implementation of this IPIP will
introduce additional blocks required for verifying.

As long the client was written in a trustless manner, and follows ring and was discarding
unexpected blocks, this will be a backward-compatible change.

#### CAR format with `entity-bytes` and `dag-scope` parameters

These parameters are opt-in, which means no breaking changes.

Gateways ignore unknown URL parameters. A client sending them to a
gateway that does not implement this IPIP will get all blocks for the requested
DAG.

#### CAR roots and determinism

As of 2023-06-20, the behavior of the `roots`  CAR field remains an [unresolved item within the CARv1 specification](https://web.archive.org/web/20230328013837/https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/#unresolved-items):

> Regarding the roots property of the Header block:
>
> - The current Go implementation assumes at least one CID when creating a CAR
> - The current Go implementation requires at least one CID when reading a CAR
> - The current JavaScript implementation allows for zero or more roots
> - Current usage of the CAR format in Filecoin requires exactly one CID
>
> [..]
>
> It is unresolved how the roots array should be constrained. It is recommended
> that only a single root CID be used in this version of the CAR format.
>
> A work-around for use-cases where the inclusion of a root CID is difficult
> but needing to be safely within the "at least one" recommendation is to use
> an empty CID: `\x01\x55\x00\x00` (zero-length "identity" multihash with "raw"
> codec). Since current implementations for this version of the CAR
> specification don't check for the existence of root CIDs
> (see [Root CID block existence](https://web.archive.org/web/20230328013837/https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/#root-cid-block-existence)),
> this will be safe as far as CAR implementations are concerned. However, there
> is no guarantee that applications that use CAR files will correctly consume
> (ignore) this empty root CID.

Due to the inconsistent and non-deterministic nature of CAR implementations,
the gateway specification faces limitations in providing specific
recommendations. Nevertheless, it is crucial for implementations to refrain
from making implicit assumptions based on the legacy behavior of individual CAR
implementations.

Due to this, gateway specification changes introduced in this IPIP clarify that:
- The CAR `roots` behavior is out of scope and flags that clients MAY ignore it.
- CAR determinism is not present by default, responses may differ across
  requests and gateways.
- Opt-in determinism is possible, but standardized signaling mechanism does not
  exist until we have IPIP-412 or similar.

### Security

This IPIP allows clients to narrow down the amount of data returned as a CAR,
and introduces a need for defensive programming when the feature set of the
remote gateway is unknown.

To avoid denial of service, and resource starvation, clients should probe if
the gateway supports features described in this IPIP before requesting data, to
avoid fetching big DAGs when only a small subset of blocks is expected.

Following the robustness principle, invalid, duplicate or unexpected blocks
should be discarded.

### Alternatives

Below are alternate designs that were considered, but decided to be out of scope for this IPIP.

#### Arbitrary IPLD Selectors

Passing arbitrary selectors was rejected due to the implementation complexity,
risks, and weak value proposition, as [discussed during IPFS Thing 2022](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/348#issuecomment-1326869509)

#### Additional "Web" Scope

A request for
`/ipfs/bafybeiaysi4s6lnjev27ln5icwm6tueaw2vdykrtjkwiphwekaywqhcjze/wiki/?format=car&dag-scope=entity`
returns all blocks required for enumeration of the big HAMT `/wiki` directory,
and then an additional request for `index.html` needs to be issued.

Website hosting use case could be made more efficient if gateway returned a CAR
with `index.html` instead of all blocks for directory enumeration. The server
already did the work: it knows the entity is a directory, already parsed it, it
knows it has child entity named `index.html`, and everyone would pay a lower cost due
to lower number of blocks being returned in a single round-trip, instead of two.

Rhea/Saturn projects requested this to be out of scope for now, but this "web"
entity scope could be added in the future, as a follow-up optimization IPIP.

#### Requesting specific DAG depth

Blindly requesting specific DAG depth did not translate to any type of
requests web gateways like `ipfs.io` or one in Brave browser have to handle.

It is impossible to know if some entity on a sub-path is a file or a directory,
without sending a probe for the root block, which introduces one round-trip overhead
per entity.

This problem is not present in the case of `dag-scope=entity`, which shifts the
decision to the server, and allows for fetching unknown UnixFS entity with a
single request.

## Test fixtures

Relevant tests were added to
[gateway-conformance](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance) test suite
in [#56](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/pull/56) and
[#85](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/issues/85).
A detailed list of compliance checks for `dag-scope` and `entity-bytes` can be found in
[`v0.2.0/trustless_gateway_car_test.go`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/blob/v0.2.0/tests/trustless_gateway_car_test.go) or later.

Below are CIDs, CARs, and short summary of each fixture.

### Testing pathing

The main utility of this scope is saving round-trips when retrieving a specific
entity as a member of a bigger DAG.

To test, request a small file that fits in a single block from a sub-path. The
returned CAR MUST include both the block with the file data and all blocks
necessary for traversing from the root CID to the terminating element (all
parents, root CID and a subdirectory below it).

:::example

Sample fixtures:

- `bafybeietjm63oynimmv5yyqay33nui4y4wx6u3peezwetxgiwvfmelutzu`
  from [`subdir-with-two-single-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/subdir-with-two-single-block-files.car)
  for testing `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir/ascii.txt?format=car`
  (UnixFS file in a subdirectory)

- `bafybeidbclfqleg2uojchspzd4bob56dqetqjsj27gy2cq3klkkgxtpn4i`
  from [`single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car)
  for testing `/ipfs/dag-pb-hamt-cid/686.txt?format=car`
  (UnixFS file on a path within HAMT-sharded parent directory)

- `bafybeia264q44a3kmfc2otctzu4egp2k235o3t7mslz2yjraymp4nv6asi`
  from [`dir-with-dag-cbor-with-links.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/dir-with-dag-cbor-with-links.car)
  for testing `/ipfs/dag-cbor-cid/document?format=car`
  (UnixFS file on a path with DAG-CBOR root CID)

:::

### Testing `dag-scope=block`

The main utility of this scope is resolving content paths. This means a CAR
response with blocks related to path traversal, and the root block of the
terminating entity.

To test real world use, request UnixFS `file` or a `directory` from a sub-path.
The returned CAR MUST include blocks required for path traversal and ONLY the
root block of the terminating entity.

:::example

Sample fixtures:

- `bafybeietjm63oynimmv5yyqay33nui4y4wx6u3peezwetxgiwvfmelutzu`
  from [`subdir-with-two-single-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/subdir-with-two-single-block-files.car)
  for testing
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir/ascii.txt?format=car&dag-scope=block` (UnixFS file in a subdirectory)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid?format=car&dag-scope=block` (UnixFS directory)

- `bafybeidbclfqleg2uojchspzd4bob56dqetqjsj27gy2cq3klkkgxtpn4i`
  from [`single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-hamt-cid/1.txt?format=car&dag-scope=block`
    (UnixFS multi-block file on a path within HAMT-sharded parent directory)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-hamt-cid?format=car&dag-scope=block`
    (UnixFS HAMT-sharded directory)

:::

### Testing `dag-scope=entity`

The main utility of this scope is retrieving all blocks related to a meaningful
IPLD entity. Currently, the most popular entity types are:

- UnixFS `file`
  (blocks for all chunks with file data)

- UnixFS `directory`
  (blocks for the directory node, allowing its enumeration;
  no root blocks for any of the child entities).

- `raw` / `dag-cbor`
  (block with raw data or DAG-CBOR document, potentially linking to other CIDs)

:::example

Sample fixtures:

- `bafybeidh6k2vzukelqtrjsmd4p52cpmltd2ufqrdtdg6yigi73in672fwu`
  from [`subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir/multiblock.txt?format=car&dag-scope=entity` (UnixFS multi-block file in a subdirectory)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir?format=car&dag-scope=entity` (UnixFS directory)

- `bafybeidbclfqleg2uojchspzd4bob56dqetqjsj27gy2cq3klkkgxtpn4i`
  from [`single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/single-layer-hamt-with-multi-block-files.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-hamt-cid/1.txt?format=car&dag-scope=entity`
    (UnixFS multi-block file on a path within HAMT-sharded parent directory, returned blocks MUST be enough to deserialize the file)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-hamt-cid?format=car&dag-scope=entity`
    (UnixFS HAMT-sharded directory, response MUST include the minimal set of blocks required for enumeration of directory contents, and no blocks that belong to child entities)

- `bafybeia264q44a3kmfc2otctzu4egp2k235o3t7mslz2yjraymp4nv6asi`
  from [`dir-with-dag-cbor-with-links.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/dir-with-dag-cbor-with-links.car)
  for testing `/ipfs/dag-cbor-cid/document?format=car&dag-scope=entity`
  (DAG-CBOR document with IPLD Links must return all necessary blocks to verify the path, the document itself, but not the content behind any of the child entity IPLD Links)

:::

### Testing `dag-scope=all`

This is the implicit default used when `dag-scope` is not present,
and used in the context of deserialized UnixFS TAR responses from :cite[ipip-0288].

:::example

Sample fixtures:

- `bafybeidh6k2vzukelqtrjsmd4p52cpmltd2ufqrdtdg6yigi73in672fwu`
  from [`subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir?format=car&dag-scope=all` (path parents and the entire UnixFS subdirectory, returned recursively)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir/multiblock.txt?format=car&dag-scope=all` (path parents and the entire UnixFS multi-block file)

:::

### Testing `entity-bytes=from:to`

This type of CAR response is used for facilitating HTTP Range Requests and
byte seek within bigger entities.

:::warning

Properly testing this type of response requires synthetic DAG that is only
partially retrievable. This ensures systems that perform internal caching
won't pass the test due to the entire DAG being precached, or fetched in full.

:::

Use of the below fixture is highly recommended:

:::example

- `bafybeidh6k2vzukelqtrjsmd4p52cpmltd2ufqrdtdg6yigi73in672fwu`
  from [`subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/subdir-with-mixed-block-files.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir/multiblock.txt?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=0:*` (path blocks and all the blocks for the multi-block UnixFS file)
  - `multiblock.txt?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=512:1023` (path blocks and all the blocks for the the range request within multi-block UnixFS file)
  - `multiblock.txt?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=512:-256` (path blocks and all the blocks for the the range request within multi-block UnixFS file)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid/subdir?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=0:*` (path blocks and all the blocks to enumerate UnixFS directory)

- `QmYhmPjhFjYFyaoiuNzYv8WGavpSRDwdHWe5B4M5du5Rtk`
  from [`file-3k-and-3-blocks-missing-block.car`](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/v0.2.0/fixtures/trustless_gateway_car/file-3k-and-3-blocks-missing-block.car)
  for testing:
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=0:1000` (only the blocks needed to fulfill the request, MUST succeed despite the fact that a block after the range is not retrievable)
  - `/ipfs/dag-pb-cid?format=car&dag-scope=entity&entity-bytes=2200:*` (only the blocks needed to fulfill the request, MUST succeed despite the fact that a block before the range is not retrievable)

:::

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
