---
title: "IPIP 0351: IPNS Signed Records Response Format on HTTP Gateways"
date: 2022-11-29
ipip: ratified
editors:
  - name: Henrique Dias
    github: hacdias
    url: https://hacdias.com/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/320
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/351
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/pull/9399
order: 351
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Add IPNS Signed Records response format to the [HTTP Gateway](/http-gateways/).

## Motivation

Currently, the gateway allows for trustless retrieval of data under the `/ipfs`
namespace, but fetching the data as a CAR, or Block, and then verifying it locally.
This is especially important for light IPFS clients, so that they can retrieve
data from other gateways without delegating any of the trust to them. Unfortunately,
this is not possible under the `/ipns` namespace.

In contrary to DNSLink, IPNS provides cryptographically-verifiable records that
can be verified by the client. This means that, if a gateway is able to provide
the IPNS signed record to an HTTP client, trustless retrieval would also be available
under the `/ipns` namespace.

In this IPIP, we propose adding :cite[ipns-record] as a response
format to the gateway under the `/ipns` namespace, allowing for trustless
retrieval of IPNS records.

## Detailed design

The solution is to allow the Gateway to provide an IPNS signed record by
requesting it using either the `Accept` HTTP header or the `format` URL query.

## Test fixtures

IPNS records for testing can be generated in Kubo by creating an IPNS record:

```bash
$ ipfs key gen <key-name>
k51Key

$ ipfs name publish /ipfs/bafyHash --key=<key-name> --ttl=<record-ttl>
Published to k51Key: /ipfs/bafyHash

$ ipfs routing get /ipns/k51Key > key.pb
```

## Design rationale

The current gateway already supports different response formats via the
`Accept` HTTP header and the `format` URL query. This IPIP proposes adding
one more supported format to that list.

### User benefit

By providing IPNS records through the gateway, IPFS light clients are able
to race multiple gateways in search for an IPNS record for a certain IPNS key.
This way, IPFS light clients do not necessarily need to implement the required
machinery to fetch IPNS records from other IPFS nodes through the DHT or PubSub.

In addition, the retrieval of IPNS records is trustless in the sense that they can
be verified by the client since the IPNS record includes a cryptographic signature
provided by its creator.

### Compatibility

This IPIP proposes a new format to be added to the gateway, but does not change
any prior format. Therefore, this IPIP is backwards compatible. Please note
that IPNS records are also added  to the :cite[trustless-gateway] specification.

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
