---
title: "IPIP-0425: Signaling Features on HTTP Gateways"
date: 2023-07-06
ipip: proposal
editors:
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/402#pullrequestreview-1396116569
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/412#pullrequestreview-1427137365
order: 425
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Add ability to query HTTP Gateway for an explicit list of supported features.

## Motivation

A Gateway always ships with an opinionated set of supported hash functions and
IPLD codecs, and the differences between implementations will grow over time.

For example, some legacy gateways may not support newly added features like
`dag-scope` and `entity-bytes` from :cite[ipip-0402] or the ability to get some
block ordering guarantees introduced in :cite[ipip-0412]. Future IPIPs may add
more features and response formats.

We need a light mechanism for clients to detect which gateway supports partial CARs

## Detailed design

This IPIP introduces a set of HTTP headers returned in response to `OPTIONS` request:

The `Ipfs-Gateway-Features` header is used for signalling support for specific Gateway features to the client.

The lack of the header, or missing key-value pair within the header means support status is unknown.

Initial list of key-value pairs is documented in `Ipfs-Gateway-Features` section of :cite[path-gateway]

## Design rationale

There is a good prior art for this in web browsers where HTTP `OPTIONS` method
is used in [CORS Preflight request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Preflight_request)
that checks if the CORS protocol is understood and a server is aware using
specific methods and headers.

The `OPTIONS` request if often sent by web browser anyway, so we would not be
introducing much overhead.

### User benefit

Reduced cost for both client and gateway. Sending `OPTIONS` request will be
very inexpensive, especially when compared with current status quo where a
client has to send at least one request to probe a specific feature like
support forp Blake3 hash function or `dag-scope` or `entity-bytes`.

This translates to decreased latency and ability to choose the best retrieval
strategy faster.

### Compatibility

This IPIP is fully backward-compatible with browsers and existing IPFS
ecosystem. Gateways already return CORS headers with `OPTIONS` responses, we
will simply return additional headers with the same responses.

:::issue

For JavaScript running on web pages to be able to read `Ipfs-Gateway-Features`
header it MUST be safelisted via `Access-Control-Expose-Headers`.

:::

### Security

This IPIP does not introduce any new security concerns. Probing gateway for
supported features and hash functions is already possible via regular `GET`
requests.

### Alternatives

- Exposing the list of suported features via `GET /.well-known/ipfs/gateway/features-TBD` would also work, but:
  - introduces surface for path-related deployment bugs, where Nginx is only exposing `/ipfs` namespace – in such case signaling endpoint would not be exposed to the public internet

## Test fixtures

TODO

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
