---
title: "IPIP-0428: Allowing V2-Only Records in IPNS"
date: 2023-07-24
ipip: ratified
editors:
  - name: Marcin Rataj
    github: lidel
    url: https://lidel.org/
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
  - name: Henrique Dias
    github: hacdias
    url: https://hacdias.com/
    affiliation:
        name: Protocol Labs
        url: https://protocol.ai/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/376
  - https://github.com/ipfs/boxo/pull/339
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/pull/9932
  - https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipns/pull/234
order: 428
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

Introduce support for creation and validation of compact, V2-only IPNS Records.

## Motivation

IPNS record creation and validation is overly complex due to the legacy of
decisions made in 2021.

The "V1+V2" record creation and validation was reverse-engineered and documented
the current state in [ipfs/specs#319](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319),
which created a base for specifications to improve upon.

A quick refresher on how IPNS Record lifecycle works today (2023 Q2):

- _Record Creation_ produces both V1 and V2 signatures, and the record has
  duplicated values in both top level protobuf AND `data` CBOR field.

- _Record Validation_ only cares about V2 signature, but still requires fields
  related to V1 to be always present in a record and match values from CBOR in
  `data` field, for the record to be considered valid.

We've been producing and expecting these hybrid V1+V2 records [since 2021](https://github.com/ipfs/js-ipns/pull/121).

An unfortunate result is that all mandatory values MUST be duplicated, even
when both ends use a modern client that only cares about `signatureV2` that
guards CBOR field, otherwise the record will not be valid.

What this IPIP aims to improve is allow implementations to produce lean,
V2-only IPNS records and ensure clients will interpret them as valid IPNS.

## Detailed design

Finish V2 story by making V2-Only records possible, namely:

- Record Creation: document and default to lean V2-Only records, keep V1+V2 as legacy
  backward-compatible variant.

- Record Validation: adjust the algorithm to stop requiring V1 fields when there is no
  `signatureV1`.

For details, see the updated :cite[ipns-record] specification.

## Design rationale

For modern IPNS, the outer `IpnsEntry` protobuf should effectively only have
two required fields: `data` and its `signatureV2`, and such record, as long
signature is valid, should be accepted as valid.

At the same time, we don't want to break existig software, especially software
and hardware devices which use IPNS for pulling updates.

We can get to that future in two steps:

1. Reference implementations (boxo/ipns, js-ipns) will keep producing V1+V2
   records as backward-compatible default, but we adjust validation algorithm
   to allow V2-only records, and support creation of such records as opt-in in
   modern implementations of IPFS+IPNS, like Kubo (GO) and Helia (JS).
   - Namely, only check/require fields to be duplicated in top level protobuf IF
     `signatureV1` is present in the `IpnsEntry` protobuf.
     - IF there is no `signatureV1`, the V1 record would be invalid anyway.
     - IF there is no `signatureV1` but `signatureV2` and `data` fields
       are present and valid, the V2-only record should be considered valid.
        - This will allow people to build V2-only systems that produce records that
          are considered valid.

2. At some point in the future, e.g. when we see the majority of the public
   swarm supports V2-Only records, libraries like boxo/ipns, js-ipns and
   implementations like Kubo will stop producing V1+V2 and switch to publishing
   V2-only records that are protobuf with only two fields: Data
   CBOR+signatureV2.

### User benefit

- End users: the main benefit for end user is the smaller size of IPNS Records and
  less complexity during creation/validation of modern V2-only records.

- Developers interested in IPNS: by making IPNS Record creation as simple as
  "create DAG-CBOR with these fields, and sign it", and validation to
  "signatureV2 should match the DAG-CBOR value and key". We've removed surface
  for bugs, making it easier to reason about for use in greenfield projects.

- IPFS ecosystem: lowering the complexity related to IPNS record creation and
  validation makes it more likely for third-party interoperable IPNS
  implementations to happen.

### Compatibility

- This is backward-compatible, we adjust validation logic to allow V2-only
  records, but all V1+V2 records that are being used in the wild today are
  still valid

- V2-only rollout is not part of this IPIP.
  - Our suggestion is to default to creating V1+V2 records for now, keeping
    backward-compatibility with the old IPNS clients.

  - Creation of V2-only records should be introduced as an explicit opt-in. It
    is up to implementations to decide when it is feasible to default to
    creating V2-only records on IPNS publish.

### Security

- `IpnsEntry.signatureV1` (protobuf field) is parsed only by legacy clients, modern ones ignore this value

It is highly advised to implement validation conformance tests using the fixtures
included at the end of this IPIP.

### Alternatives

Describe alternate designs that were considered and related work.

1. Just switch to V2-only as the new default!
   - No, this would be a breaking change. We have to do this in two steps,
     because we've rushed the way V2 was introduced in 2021, and STILL require
     field copying, even when `signatureV1` is missing. So technically there
     was never "V2", it was more like "V1.5". Only with this IPIP, we finally
     adjust validation to only care about CBOR values when there is no
     `signatureV1`.

2. Why keeping the outer protobuf envelope? Could we make IPNS DAG-CBOR-only?
   - Due to how long it takes for decentralized network nodes to upgrade, we prefer evolution rather than revolution.
   - Protobuf is a useful envelope for two reasons:
     1. Ensures the opaque V2-only record can be passed and stored in existing infrastructure.
     2. Allows us to evolve IPNS record ("V3") in the future without impacting existing infrastructure.

## Test fixtures

To make testing easier below are test vectors in form of IPNS records along
with the expected verification results. These test records are valid for 100
years, making them safe for use in CI tests.

1. [V1-only](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5dm4tm0wt8srkg9h9suud4wuiwjimndrkydqm81cqtlb5ak6p7ku_v1.ipns-record) → record invalid
1. [V1+V2](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5dlkw8pxuw9qmqayfdeh4kfebhmreauqdc6a7c3y7d5i9fi8mk9w_v1-v2.ipns-record) (both signatures valid) → record valid, value points at `/ipfs/bafkqaddwgevxmmraojswg33smq`
1. [V1+V2](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5dlmit2tuwdvnx4sbnyqgmvbxftl0eo3f33wwtb9gr7yozae9kpw_v1-v2-broken-v1-value.ipns-record) (both signatures valid, but 'value' is different in V1 pb vs V2 CBOR) → record invalid
1. [V1+V2](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5diamp7qnnvs1p1gzmku3eijkeijs3418j23j077zrkok63xdm8c_v1-v2-broken-signature-v2.ipns-record) (only signatureV1 valid) → record invalid
1. [V1+V2](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5dilgf7gorsh9vcqqq4myo6jd4zmqkuy9pxyxi5fua3uf7axph4y_v1-v2-broken-signature-v1.ipns-record) (only signatureV2 valid) → record valid, value points at `/ipfs/bafkqahtwgevxmmrao5uxi2bamjzg623fnyqhg2lhnzqxi5lsmuqhmmi`
1. [V2-only](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/raw/9444cca76ef362904f1ce7a9c6d553c53da5feb3/fixtures/ipns_records/k51qzi5uqu5dit2ku9mutlfgwyz8u730on38kd10m97m36bjt66my99hb6103f_v2.ipns-record) (no V1 fields) → record valid

:::note

Implementers can either write own tests against the above test vectors, or run
[gateway-conformance](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/) test suite,
which includes tests for these vectors since
[gateway-conformance/pull/157](https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/pull/157).

:::

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
