---
title: "IPIP-0417: Delegated Peer Routing HTTP API"
date: 2023-05-29
ipip: proposal
editors:
  - name: Henrique Dias
    github: hacdias
    url: https://hacdias.com/
    affiliation:
      name: Protocol Labs
      url: https://protocol.ai/
relatedIssues:
  - https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/410
  - https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/pull/9877
order: 417
tags: ['ipips']
---

## Summary

This IPIP specifies `/routing/v1/peers/{peer-id}` HTTP API to offload peer routing onto another server.

## Motivation

The motivation of this IPIP extends the one of :cite[ipip-0337] and :cite[ipip-0379],
which introduced delegated content routing and delegated naming, respectively. Now,
we expand upon those basis to introduce peer routing, reducing the barrier for interaction
across different systems.

## Detailed design

Add `/routing/v1/peers/{peer-id}` to the existing :cite[http-routing-v1] specification,
as well as the new Peer schema, that replaces the existing "known transfer protocols".

## Design rationale

In line with the remaining Routing V1 API, this IPIP introduces a new HTTP GET
endpoint that is used to retrieve peer records for a certain peer.

### User benefit

The user benefit brought by this PR is similar to the one in :cite[ipip-0379],
but instead of offloading the naming process, we offload the peer discovery and
routing.

### Compatibility

The section "Known Transfer Protocols" has been removed and replaced by a "Known Schemas"
section. Before, we used to have protocol specific schemas, such as `bitswap` and `graphsync-filecoinv1`.
The usage of the removed schemas is no longer encouraged. Instead, clients and servers
SHOULD be updated to use the new, more generic, `peer` schema.

See more in the "Compatibility" section of :cite[ipip-0337].

### Security

See the "Security" section of :cite[ipip-0337].

### Alternatives

See the "Alternatives" section of :cite[ipip-0337].

### Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
